+++
title = "WWT User Manual"
+++

The AAS WorldWide Telescope is a software environment that enables your
computer to function as a virtual telescope, combining terabytes of imagery
from such famous telescopes as Hubble, Chandra and Spitzer into one vast
panorama of the universe.

WorldWide Telescope allows seamless panning and zooming around the night sky,
our Solar System, and other space-orientated panoramas, such as the pictures
taken of the surfaces of the Moon and Mars. [Explore](explore.md) the sky at
multiple wavelengths: see the x-ray view of the sky and zoom into bright
radiation clouds, and then cross-fade into the visible light view and discover
the cloud remnants of a supernova explosion from a thousand years ago. Switch
to the Hydrogen Alpha view to see the distribution and illumination of massive
primordial hydrogen cloud structures lit up by the high energy radiation
coming from nearby stars in the Milky Way.

For a dazzling educational experience, our Solar System is modeled in three
dimensions, with the planets rotating and orbiting the Sun. Watch the majestic
beauty of Saturn's rings or the distant orbit of the dwarf planet Pluto as
they track across the sky in their accurately modeled days and years.
Accelerate the simulated time to plan a visit to the best spot for the next
solar or lunar eclipse.

Newcomers to WorldWide Telescope are recommended to browse the growing number
of [Guided Tours](guidedtours.md) of the sky by astronomers and educators from
some of the most respected observatories and planetariums. Most of the
features can be discovered simply by using the program. This documentation is
provided as a resource to help describe what is going on, and to help locate
the features that this project has to offer. There are two versions of
WorldWide Telescope, a Windows application and a web client. This
documentation set describes both, where necessary indicating where a feature
only applies to one. The essential differences between the two are that the
Windows version is downloaded and installed first, then run, and has a few
more features. The web client is not downloaded and installed, is based on
HTML5, and has fewer features but can be customized.

_WorldWide Telescope is created by Microsoft Research using the Microsoft high
performance Visual Experience Engine, and the project is dedicated to
legendary researcher Jim Gray, without whom this project would not have
happened. WorldWide Telescope is released as a free resource to the astronomy
and education community with the hope that it will inspire and empower people
to explore and understand the universe like never before._
